Improve checkpoint docs (#10916)
PyTorchLightning/pytorch-lightning: docs/source/common/weights_loading.rst

    from pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer import Trainer
    from pytorch_lightning.core.lightning import LightningModule

> .. _checkpointing:

Author: just fyi: I'll be renaming this file to `checkpointing.rst` once I get all the required approvals. Not doing it now for easy review for reviewers. Doc tests might fail because references are already updated at other places.

Open to better filename suggestions though :)

##############################
Saving and Loading Checkpoints
##############################

Lightning provides functions to save and load checkpoints.

Checkpointing your training allows you to resume a training process in case it was interrupted, fine-tune a model or use a pre-trained model for inference without having to retrain the model.

*****************

> Checkpoint Saving

Reviewer: Checkpoint contents? This section is also useful/relevant for loading, not just saving

*****************

A Lightning checkpoint has everything needed to restore a training session including:

- 16-bit scaling factor (if using 16-bit precision training)
- Current epoch
- Global step

> - Model state_dict

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Lightning Module state_dict
```

.. _weights_loading:

##############################

> Saving and Loading Checkpoints

Reviewer 2: if you call it checkpoints, this should also be reflected in the filename :)

Author: done! thanks :)

##############################

> Lightning provides functio to save and load checkpoints.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Lightning provides functions to save and load checkpoints.
```

Checkpointing your training allows you to resume a training process in case it was interrupted, fine-tune a model or use a pre-trained model for inference without having to retrain the model.

*****************
Checkpoint Saving
*****************

A Lightning checkpoint has everything needed to restore a training session including:

> - 16-bit scaling factor (if using APEX mixed-precision)

Reviewer 2: Is the scaling factor not saved when using native amp?

Author: yeah for both. .updated!!

    # saves checkpoints to '/your/path/to/save/checkpoints' at every epoch end
    trainer = Trainer(default_root_dir="/your/path/to/save/checkpoints")

You can retrieve the checkpoint after training by calling:

.. code-block:: python

        checkpoint_callback = ModelCheckpoint(dirpath="my/path/")
        trainer = Trainer(callbacks=[checkpoint_callback])
        trainer.fit(model)

>         checkpoint_callback.best_model_path

Reviewer: does this work? is `best_model_path` defined if there's no `monitor` set in the ModelCheckpoint callback?

Reviewer 3: [yep](https://github.com/PyTorchLightning/pytorch-lightning/blob/3fcfd0214cc95fa7de49f6404421b5c6cd113c57/pytorch_lightning/callbacks/model_checkpoint.py#L677). I guess its the best 1/1, though the name is even more confusing when `save_top_k = -1` and `monitor = None`. maybe we could better rename this in the future, sth like `self.latest_model_path` ?

Author: updated!

Manual Saving
=============
You can manually save checkpoints and restore your model from the checkpointed state using :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer.Trainer.save_checkpoint`
and :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.saving.ModelIO.load_from_checkpoint`.

.. code-block:: python

    model = MyLightningModule(hparams)
    trainer.fit(model)
    trainer.save_checkpoint("example.ckpt")
    new_model = MyLightningModule.load_from_checkpoint(checkpoint_path="example.ckpt")

Manual Saving with Distributed Training Strategies
==================================================

Lightning also handles strategies where multiple processes are running, such as DDP. For example, when using the DDP strategy our training script is running across multiple devices at the same time.
Lightning automatically ensures that the model is saved only on the main process, whilst other processes do not interfere with saving checkpoints. This requires no code changes as seen below:

.. code-block:: python

    trainer = Trainer(strategy="ddp")
    model = MyLightningModule(hparams)
    trainer.fit(model)
    # Saves only on the main process
    trainer.save_checkpoint("example.ckpt")

> Not using :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer.Trainer.save_checkpoint` can lead to unexpected behaviour and potential deadlock. Using other saving functions will result in all devices attempting to save the checkpoint. As a result, we highly recommend using the trainer's save functionality.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Not using :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer.Trainer.save_checkpoint` can lead to unexpected behavior and potential deadlock. Using other saving functions will result in all devices attempting to save the checkpoint. As a result, we highly recommend using the Trainer's save functionality.
```
The majority of the docs and Lightning uses the American

> If using custom saving functions cannot be avoided, we recommend using :func:`~pytorch_lightning.utilities.distributed.rank_zero_only` to ensure saving occurs only on the main process.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If using custom saving functions cannot be avoided, we recommend using the :func:`~pytorch_lightning.utilities.distributed.rank_zero_only` decorator to ensure saving occurs only on the main process.
```

> Modifying Checkpoint on Saving and Loading
> ==========================================

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Modifying Checkpoint When Saving and Loading
============================================
```

> If using custom saving functions cannot be avoided, we recommend using the :func:`~pytorch_lightning.utilities.distributed.rank_zero_only` decorator to ensure saving occurs only on the main process.

Reviewer: For model parallel use cases, using `rank_zero_only` will not work. `rank_zero_only` is recommended only if all ranks hold the exact same state.

Author: updated!

You can add/delete/modify custom states in your checkpoints before they are being saved or loaded. For this you can override :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.hooks.CheckpointHooks.on_save_checkpoint`
and :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.hooks.CheckpointHooks.on_load_checkpoint` in your ``LightningModule`` or :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.callbacks.base.Callback.on_save_checkpoint` and
:meth:`~pytorch_lightning.callbacks.base.Callback.on_load_checkpoint` methods in your ``Callback``.

> Disabling Checkpoints

Reviewer 3: maybe this can be right after `Automatic Saving` section?

=====================

You can disable checkpointing by passing:

.. testcode::

   trainer = Trainer(enable_checkpointing=False)

> Checkpointing Hyper-parameters

Reviewer 4: This form is less common, let's use the common term "Hyperparameters"?

   # automatically restores model, epoch, step, LR schedulers, apex, etc...
   trainer.fit(model, ckpt_path="some/path/to/my_checkpoint.ckpt")

-----------

*******************************************
Conditional Checkpointing (ModelCheckpoint)
*******************************************

> The :class:`~pytorch_lightning.callbacks.ModelCheckpoint` callback allows you to configure how & when checkpointing should happen. It follows the normal Callback hook structure so you can

Reviewer 3: how & when --> when & which ?

Author: how about?
```
The :class:`~pytorch_lightning.callbacks.ModelCheckpoint` callback allows you to configure how, when, and which checkpoints should be saved to storage.
```

Reviewer 3: hm i guess "how" could encompass a lot, though probably avoid "how to storage" as that's very specifically IOPlugin

        )

- You can save top-K and last-K checkpoints by configuring the ``monitor`` and ``save_top_k`` argument.

|

    .. testcode::

        from pytorch_lightning.callbacks import ModelCheckpoint

        # saves top-K checkpoints based on "val_loss" metric
        checkpoint_callback = ModelCheckpoint(
            save_top_k=10,
            monitor="val_loss",
            mode="min",
            dirpath="my/path/",
            filename="sample-mnist-{epoch:02d}-{val_loss:.2f}",
        )

        # saves last-K checkpoints based on "global_step" metric
        # make sure you log it inside your LightningModule
        checkpoint_callback = ModelCheckpoint(
            save_top_k=10,
            monitor="global_step",
            mode="max",
            dirpath="my/path/",
            filename="sample-mnist-{epoch:02d}-{global_step}",
        )

- When using iterative training which doesn't have an epoch, you can checkpoint at every ``N`` training steps by specifying ``every_n_training_steps=N``.
- You can also control the interval of epochs between checkpoints using ``every_n_epochs`` between checkpoints, to avoid slowdowns.

> - By default, the ``ModelCheckpoint`` callback saves model weights, optimizer states, etc., but in case you have limited disk space or just need the model weights to be saved you can specify ``save_weights_only=True``.

Reviewer 3: switch line 266 and 267 so that the "when" triggers can be together  (`every_n_epochs` / `every_n_training_steps` / `train_time_interval`)

> - You can checkpoint at a regular time interval using ``train_time_interval`` argument independent of the steps or epochs.

Reviewer 3: probably a separate PR, but i'm thinking we can categorize this a bit more later e.g.

"when" = triggers (`every_n_epochs` / `every_n_training_steps` / `train_time_interval`)
"which" = `save_top_k`, `save_last`
"what" = `save_weights_only`
"where" = `dirpath`, `filename`, `auto_insert_metric_name`

Author: this is a newly added section. I'll improve it based on your points.

Author: did some updates! mind review?

|

The :class:`~pytorch_lightning.callbacks.ModelCheckpoint` callback is very robust and should cover 99% of the use-cases. If you find a use-case that is not configured yet, feel free to open an issue with a feature request on GitHub
and the Lightning Team will be happy to integrate/help integrate it.

-----------

***********************
Customize Checkpointing
***********************

.. warning::

    The Checkpoint IO API is experimental and subject to change.

Lightning supports modifying the checkpointing save/load functionality through the ``CheckpointIO``. This encapsulates the save/load logic
that is managed by the ``TrainingTypePlugin``. ``CheckpointIO`` is different from :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.hooks.CheckpointHooks.on_save_checkpoint`

> and :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.hooks.CheckpointHooks.on_load_checkpoint` methods as it determines how the checkpoint is saved/loaded rather than

Reviewer 3: love the added distinction :)
(maybe "how the checkpoint is saved/loaded" --> "how the checkpoint is saved/loaded to storage") ?

   # automatically restores model, epoch, step, LR schedulers, apex, etc...
   trainer.fit(model, ckpt_path="some/path/to/my_checkpoint.ckpt")

-----------

*******************************************
Conditional Checkpointing (ModelCheckpoint)
*******************************************

> :class:`~pytorch_lightning.callbacks.ModelCheckpoint` callback allows you to configure how & when checkpointing should happen. It follows the normal Callback hook structure so you can

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The :class:`~pytorch_lightning.callbacks.ModelCheckpoint` callback allows you to configure how & when checkpointing should happen. It follows the normal Callback hook structure so you can
```

hack it around/override its methods for your use-cases as well. Following are some of the common use-cases along with the arguments you need to specify to configure it:

-  You can customize the checkpointing behavior to monitor any quantity of your training or validation steps. For example, if you want to update your checkpoints based on your validation loss:

|

    .. testcode::

        from pytorch_lightning.callbacks import ModelCheckpoint

        class LitAutoEncoder(LightningModule):
            def validation_step(self, batch, batch_idx):
                x, y = batch
                y_hat = self.backbone(x)

                # 1. calculate loss
                loss = F.cross_entropy(y_hat, y)

                # 2. log val_loss
                self.log("val_loss", loss)

        # 3. Init ModelCheckpoint callback, monitoring "val_loss"
        checkpoint_callback = ModelCheckpoint(monitor="val_loss")

        # 4. Add your callback to the callbacks list
        trainer = Trainer(callbacks=[checkpoint_callback])

> - It gives you the ability to specify the ``dirpath`` and ``filename`` for your checkpoints. Filename can also be dynamic so you can inject the metrics that are being logged using
>   :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.lightning.LightningModule.log`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- It gives you the ability to specify the ``dirpath`` and ``filename`` for your checkpoints. Filename can also be dynamic so you can inject the metrics that are being logged using :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.lightning.LightningModule.log`.
```

|

    .. testcode::

        from pytorch_lightning.callbacks import ModelCheckpoint

        # saves a file like: my/path/sample-mnist-epoch=02-val_loss=0.32.ckpt
        checkpoint_callback = ModelCheckpoint(
            dirpath="my/path/",
            filename="sample-mnist-{epoch:02d}-{val_loss:.2f}",
        )

- You can save top-K and last-K checkpoints by configuring the ``monitor`` and ``save_top_k`` argument.

|

    .. testcode::

        from pytorch_lightning.callbacks import ModelCheckpoint

        # saves top-K checkpoints based on "val_loss" metric
        checkpoint_callback = ModelCheckpoint(
            monitor="val_loss",
            mode="min",
            dirpath="my/path/",

>             filename="sample-mnist-{epoch:02d}-{val_loss:.2f}",

Reviewer 4: K is not specified here. by default save_top_k=1
same in the example below.

        )

        # saves last-K checkpoints based on "global_step" metric
        # make sure you log it inside your LightningModule
        checkpoint_callback = ModelCheckpoint(
            monitor="global_step",
            mode="max",
            dirpath="my/path/",
            filename="sample-mnist-{epoch:02d}-{global_step}",
        )

- When using iterative training which doesn't have an epoch, you can checkpoint at every ``N`` training steps by specifying ``every_n_training_steps=N``.

> - In case your training is interrupted for some reason, you can specify ``save_last=True`` to ensure that a checkpoint is being created at the end so that you can
>   resume it or use it for :doc:`fault-tolerant training <../advanced/fault_tolerant_training>`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- In case your training is interrupted for some reason, you can specify ``save_last=True`` to ensure that a checkpoint is being created at the end so that you can
  resume it or use it for :doc:`fault-tolerant training <../advanced/fault_tolerant_training>`.
```
That's not actually the use for it. 
last.ckpt is always getting saved when saving a regular checkpoint. It's an identical copy, with the key difference being that the name can always be determined as last.ckpt. This is normally not possible with save_last=False because the filename may contain arbitrary information. Fault-tolerant has it's own checkpoint file name and location, it's unrelated to this one.

Author: removed!
updated all!
thank you for extensive review 😃

- You can also control the interval of epochs between checkpoints using ``every_n_epochs`` between checkpoints, to avoid slowdowns.

> - By default ``ModelCheckpoint`` callback saves model weights, optimizer states, etc., but in case you have limited disk space or just need the model weights to be saved you can specify ``save_weights_only=True``.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- By default, the``ModelCheckpoint`` callback saves model weights, optimizer states, etc., but in case you have limited disk space or just need the model weights to be saved you can specify ``save_weights_only=True``.
```

> - Not just the training epoch/steps, you can checkpoint at regular time interval using ``train_time_interval`` argument.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- You can checkpoint at a regular time interval using ``train_time_interval`` argument independent of the steps or epochs.
```

|

> :class:`~pytorch_lightning.callbacks.ModelCheckpoint` callback is preety robust and should cover 99% of the use-cases. In case you have a use-case that is not configured yet, feel free to open an issue with a feature-request on GitHub

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The :class:`~pytorch_lightning.callbacks.ModelCheckpoint` callback is very robust and should cover 99% of the use-cases. If you find a use-case that is not configured yet, feel free to open an issue with a feature request on GitHub
```
word repetition: "case"

> and Lightning Team would be happy to integrate/help integrate it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and the Lightning Team will be happy to integrate/help integrate it.
```

***********************
Customize Checkpointing
***********************

.. warning::

    The Checkpoint IO API is experimental and subject to change.

Lightning supports modifying the checkpointing save/load functionality through the ``CheckpointIO``. This encapsulates the save/load logic
that is managed by the ``TrainingTypePlugin``. ``CheckpointIO`` is different from :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.hooks.CheckpointHooks.on_save_checkpoint`
and :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.hooks.CheckpointHooks.on_load_checkpoint` methods as it determines how the checkpoint is saved/loaded rather than
what's saved in the checkpoint.

Built-in Checkpoint IO Plugins
==============================

.. list-table:: Built-in Checkpoint IO Plugins
   :widths: 25 75
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Plugin
     - Description
   * - :class:`~pytorch_lightning.plugins.io.TorchCheckpointIO`
     - CheckpointIO that utilizes :func:`torch.save` and :func:`torch.load` to save and load checkpoints
       respectively, common for most use cases.
   * - :class:`~pytorch_lightning.plugins.io.XLACheckpointIO`
     - CheckpointIO that utilizes :func:`xm.save` to save checkpoints for TPU training strategies.

> Custom Checkpoint IO Plugin
> ===========================

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Custom Checkpoint IO Plugin
===========================

```

``CheckpointIO`` can be extended to include your custom save/load functionality to and from a path. The ``CheckpointIO`` object can be passed to either a ``Trainer`` directly or a ``TrainingTypePlugin`` as shown below:

.. code-block:: python

    from pathlib import Path

>     from typing import Any, Dict, Optional, Union

Reviewer 4: Can you remove the typing? It's noise for the reader and if they need that information, they would look it up in their IDE / API reference.

    from pytorch_lightning import Trainer
    from pytorch_lightning.callbacks import ModelCheckpoint
    from pytorch_lightning.plugins import CheckpointIO, SingleDevicePlugin

    class CustomCheckpointIO(CheckpointIO):
        def save_checkpoint(

>             self, checkpoint: Dict[str, Any], path: Union[str, Path], storage_options: Optional[Any] = None

Reviewer 4: let's remove the typing

        ) -> None:
            ...

        def load_checkpoint(self, path: Union[str, Path], storage_options: Optional[Any] = None) -> Dict[str, Any]:
            ...

        def remove_checkpoint(self, path: _PATH) -> None:
            ...

    custom_checkpoint_io = CustomCheckpointIO()

    # Either pass into the Trainer object
    model = MyModel()
    trainer = Trainer(
        plugins=[custom_checkpoint_io],
        callbacks=ModelCheckpoint(save_last=True),
    )
    trainer.fit(model)

    # or pass into TrainingTypePlugin
    model = MyModel()
    device = torch.device("cpu")
    trainer = Trainer(
        plugins=SingleDevicePlugin(device, checkpoint_io=custom_checkpoint_io),
        callbacks=ModelCheckpoint(save_last=True),
    )
    trainer.fit(model)

.. note::

>     Some ``TrainingTypePlugins`` for eg. ``DeepSpeedPlugin`` do not support custom ``CheckpointIO`` as checkpointing logic is not modifiable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    Some ``TrainingTypePlugins`` like ``DeepSpeedPlugin`` do not support custom ``CheckpointIO`` as checkpointing logic is not modifiable.
```

   # automatically restores model, epoch, step, LR schedulers, apex, etc...
   trainer.fit(model, ckpt_path="some/path/to/my_checkpoint.ckpt")

-----------

*******************************************
Conditional Checkpointing (ModelCheckpoint)
*******************************************

The :class:`~pytorch_lightning.callbacks.ModelCheckpoint` callback allows you to configure when/which/what/where checkpointing should happen. It follows the normal Callback hook structure so you can
hack it around/override its methods for your use-cases as well. Following are some of the common use-cases along with the arguments you need to specify to configure it:

How does it work?
=================

``ModelCheckpoint`` helps cover the following cases from WH-Family:

When
----

- When using iterative training which doesn't have an epoch, you can checkpoint at every ``N`` training steps by specifying ``every_n_training_steps=N``.
- You can also control the interval of epochs between checkpoints using ``every_n_epochs`` between checkpoints, to avoid slowdowns.
- You can checkpoint at a regular time interval using ``train_time_interval`` argument independent of the steps or epochs.

> 

Author: done!
